



Network Working Group                                        B. Trammell
Internet-Draft                                             M. Kuehlewind
Intended status: Informational                                ETH Zurich
Expires: May 19, 2018                                  November 15, 2017


                  The Wire Image of a Network Protocol
                    draft-trammell-wire-image-latest

Abstract

   This document defines the wire image, an abstraction of the
   information available to an on-path non-participant in a networking
   protocol.  This abstraction is intended to shed light on current
   discussions within the IETF on the implications on increased
   encryption has for network functions that use the wire image.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 19, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Trammell & Kuehlewind     Expires May 19, 2018                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 Wire Image                  November 2017


1.  Introduction

   A protocol specification defines a set of behaviors for each
   participant in the protocol: which lower-layer protocols are used for
   which services, how messages are formatted and protected, which
   participant sends which message when, how each participant should
   respond to each message, and so on.

   Implicit in a protocol specification is the information the protocol
   radiates toward nonparticipant observers of the messages sent among
   participants.  Any information that has a clear definition in the
   protocol's message format(s), or is implied by that definition, and
   is not cryptographically confidentiality-protected can be
   unambiguously interpreted by those observers.

   This information comprises the protocol's wire image, which we define
   and discuss in this document.  It is the wire image, not the
   protocol's specification, that determines how third parties on the
   network paths among protocol participants can interact with that
   protocol.

   Several documents currently under discussion in IETF working groups
   and the IETF in general, for example [QUIC-MANAGEABILITY],
   [EFFECT-ENCRYPT], and [TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT], discuss in part impacts on
   the third-party use of wire images caused by a migration from
   protocols whose wire images are largely not confidentiality protected
   (e.g.  HTTP over TCP) to protocols whose wire images are
   confidentiality protected (e.g.  H2 over QUIC).

   This document presents the wire image abstraction with the hope that
   it can shed some light on these discussions.

2.  Definition

   More formally, the wire image of a protocol consists of:

   1.  The sequence of messages sent by each participant in the
       protocol, each expressed as a sequence of bits with an associated
       arbitrary-precision time at which it was sent.

   2.  The vectore of the values of any arbitrary set of functions
       applied to the sequence (1) above.

3.  Discussion

   This definition is so vague as to be difficult to apply to protocol
   analysis, but it does illustrate some important properties of the
   wire image:



Trammell & Kuehlewind     Expires May 19, 2018                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 Wire Image                  November 2017


   o  The wire image is not limited to merely "the unencrypted bits in
      the header".  In particular, timing, size, and sequence
      information can be used to infer other parameters of the behavior
      of the protocol, or to fingerprint protocols and/or specific
      implmentations of the protocol.

   o  The wire image is multidimensional.  This implies that the name
      "image" is not merely metaphorical, and that general image
      recognition techniques can be applied to extracting paterns and
      information from it.

3.1.  Obscuring timing and sizing information

   Cryptography can protect the confidentiality of a protocol's headers,
   to the extent that forwarding devices do not need the
   confidentiality-protected information for basic forwarding
   operations.  However, it cannot be applied to protecting non-header
   information in the wire image.  Of particular interest is the
   sequence of packet sizes and the sequence of packet times.  These are
   characteristic of the operation of the protocol.  A sender may use
   padding to increase the size of packets, and inject delay into
   sending in order to increase delay components, however it does this
   as the expense of bandwidth efficiency and latency.  This technique
   is therefore limited to the tolerance for inefficiency and latency of
   the application.

3.2.  Integrity Protection of the Wire Image

   Portions of the wire image of a protocol that are neither
   confidentiality-protected nor integrity-protected are writable by
   devices on a path.  A protocol with a wire image that is largely
   writable operating over a path with devices that understand the
   semantics of the protocol's wire image can modify it, in order to
   induce behaviors at the protocol's participants.  This is the case
   with TCP in the modern Internet.

   Adding end-to-end integrity protection to portions of the wire image
   makes those portions nonwritable.  Nonwritable portions of the wire
   image may be observed by on-path devices, but not changed.

   Note that a protocol's wire image cannot be made completely
   nonwritable in a packet-switched network: the observed delay sequence
   is modified as packets move through the network and experience
   different delays on different links, packets may always be dropped,
   as a consequence of the network's operation.  Intermediate systems
   with knowledge of the protocol semantics in the readable portion of
   the wire image can also purposely delay or drop packets in order to
   affect the protocol's operation.



Trammell & Kuehlewind     Expires May 19, 2018                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 Wire Image                  November 2017


3.3.  Engineering the Wire Image

   We note that understanding the nature of a protocol's wire image
   allows it to be engineered.  The general principle at work here,
   observed through experience with deployability and non-deployability
   of protocols at the network and transport layers in the Internet, is
   that all observable parts of a protocol's wire image will eventually
   ossify, and become difficult or impossible to change in future
   extensions or revisions of the protocol.

   A network function which serves a purpose useful to its deployer will
   use the information it needs from the wire image, and will tend to
   get that information from the wire image in the simplest way
   possible.  A protocol's wire image should therefore be explicitly
   designed to explicitly expose information to those network functions
   in an obvious way, and to expose as little other information as
   possible.

4.  Acknowledgments

   This work is partially supported by the European Commission under
   Horizon 2020 grant agreement no. 688421 Measurement and Architecture
   for a Middleboxed Internet (MAMI), and by the Swiss State Secretariat
   for Education, Research, and Innovation under contract no. 15.0268.
   This support does not imply endorsement.

5.  Informative References

   [EFFECT-ENCRYPT]
              Moriarty, K. and A. Morton, "Effect of Pervasive
              Encryption on Operators", draft-mm-wg-effect-encrypt-13
              (work in progress), October 2017.

   [QUIC-MANAGEABILITY]
              Kuehlewind, M. and B. Trammell, "Manageability of the QUIC
              Transport Protocol", draft-ietf-quic-manageability-01
              (work in progress), October 2017.

   [TRANSPORT-ENCRYPT]
              Fairhurst, G. and C. Perkins, "The Impact of Transport
              Header Encryption on Operation and Evolution of the
              Internet", draft-fairhurst-tsvwg-transport-encrypt-04
              (work in progress), September 2017.








Trammell & Kuehlewind     Expires May 19, 2018                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 Wire Image                  November 2017


Authors' Addresses

   Brian Trammell
   ETH Zurich
   Gloriastrasse 35
   8092 Zurich
   Switzerland

   Email: ietf@trammell.ch


   Mirja Kuehlewind
   ETH Zurich
   Gloriastrasse 35
   8092 Zurich
   Switzerland

   Email: ietf@trammell.ch

































Trammell & Kuehlewind     Expires May 19, 2018                  [Page 5]
